DOC-3329: Premium Plugins Installation and Bundling Documentation for NPM (#3928)
tinymce/tinymce-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/bundling-plugins.adoc

:description_short: Information on bundling plugins
:description: Information on bundling TinyMCE plugins using module loading

== Overview

{productname} plugins can be bundled using module loaders such as Webpack, Rollup, or Vite. This guide covers how to include both community and premium plugins in your application bundle.

{productname} includes both community and premium plugins:

* **Community plugins**: Available with all {productname} installations
* **Premium plugins**: Available with paid {productname} subscriptions via the `+tinymce-premium+` package

:editorcomponent: plugin

> include::partial$module-loading/bundling-ref-example.adoc[]

Reviewer: It seems the `adoc` file for the example also includes the Overview heading. It appears like this in the page now: 
<img width="1325" height="709" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/13a33c83-cea0-4182-a762-d13ff03cd449" />

Author: Thanks @soritaheng it was causing issue on other pages also, so good catch. Updated in [this commit](https://github.com/tinymce/tinymce-docs/pull/3928/commits/5d9cb217be806729a981a10df2fb8891caea00d3)

|npm (premium plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
require('tinymce-premium/plugins/<plugincode>');
----

|`.zip` (community plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
require('<path_to_tinymce_zip>/plugins/<plugincode>');
----

|`.zip` (premium plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
require('<path_to_tinymce_premium_zip>/plugins/<plugincode>');
----
|===

[[using-premium-plugins]]
== Using premium plugins

After installing the `+tinymce-premium+` package, you need to configure the plugins in your editor. There are two main approaches:

[IMPORTANT]
====
*License Key Manager Requirement:*

When using premium plugins with a commercial license, you must include the `+licensekeymanager+` plugin. The editor will not function properly without it. For more information, see: xref:license-key.adoc[License Key].

*xref:bundling-plugins.adoc#bundling-recommended[When bundling]:*
[source,js]
----
import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/licensekeymanager';
----

*xref:bundling-plugins.adoc#using-external-plugins[When using `+external_plugins+`]:*
[source,js]
----
external_plugins: {
  'licensekeymanager': '<path_to_premium_plugins>/licensekeymanager/plugin.min.js'
}
----
====

[[bundling-recommended]]
=== Bundling (Recommended)

> For most modern applications, bundling premium plugins is recommended. This includes the plugin code directly in your application bundle.

Reviewer: In our integration guides, there are admonitions recommending not to bundle. For example: 
- React: https://pr-3928.tinymce-docs.iad.staging.tiny.cloud/docs/tinymce/latest/react-pm-bundle/
- Angular: https://pr-3928.tinymce-docs.iad.staging.tiny.cloud/docs/tinymce/latest/angular-pm/#bunding-TinyMCE-with-an-angular-application
- Vue: https://pr-3928.tinymce-docs.iad.staging.tiny.cloud/docs/tinymce/latest/vue-pm/

I was wondering if this could be inconsistent messaging, or if that warning is no longer relevant or only to integrations.

Reviewer 2: I am confident to say those admonitions are no longer relevant because I had no trouble bundling tinymce with those integrations in my investigation. 

@kemister85, we should remove them 
- [x] Remove admonitions recommending not to bundle with tinymce in the above pages

Author: Removed in [commit](https://github.com/tinymce/tinymce-docs/pull/3928/commits/9020ea8003b49ee5589d14e11c7bc9fa1b38ce3f)

  selector: 'textarea',
  license_key: 'T8LK:...', // Your commercial license key
  plugins: 'advcode tinycomments',
  // ... other configuration
});
----

For complete bundling examples, see the <<premium-plugins,Premium plugins>> and <<community-plugins,Community plugins>> sections below.

[[using-external-plugins]]
=== Using external_plugins (Non-bundling)

When bundling is not available or you want to lazy-load plugins, use the `+external_plugins+` option:

[source,js]
----
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',
  license_key: 'T8LK:...', // Your commercial license key
  external_plugins: {
    'advcode': '<path_to_premium_plugins>/advcode/plugin.min.js',
    'tinycomments': '<path_to_premium_plugins>/tinycomments/plugin.min.js',
    // Always include the licensekeymanager plugin when using premium plugins with a commercial license.
    'licensekeymanager': '<path_to_premium_plugins>/licensekeymanager/plugin.min.js'
  },
  plugins: 'advcode tinycomments',
  // ... other configuration
});
----

[NOTE]
====
The `+external_plugins+` option supports three URL formats:

* Absolute URLs (e.g., `+https://cdn.example.com/...`)
* Relative to web-server root (e.g., `+/node_modules/...`)

> * Relative to {productname} `+base_url+` (e.g., `+../../node_modules/...`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Absolute URLs (e.g., `+https://cdn.example.com/...+`)
* Relative to web-server root (e.g., `+/node_modules/...+`)
* Relative to {productname} `+base_url+` (e.g., `+../../node_modules/...+`)
```

Author: Fixed in [this commit](https://github.com/tinymce/tinymce-docs/pull/3928/commits/d9a88a1704f9adc652912bd6af597eae10f439e0) Thanks @soritaheng

:description_short: Information on bundling plugins
:description: Information on bundling TinyMCE plugins using module loading

== Overview

> {productname} plugins can be bundled using module loaders such as Webpack, Rollup, or Vite. This guide covers how to include both community and premium plugins in your application bundle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{productname} plugins can be bundled using a module bundler such as Webpack, Rollup, or Vite. This guide covers how to include both community and premium plugins in your application bundle.
```

[cols='1,2,3']
|===
|Module Syntax |Source |Example

.4+|ES6+
|npm (community plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
import 'tinymce/plugins/<plugincode>';
----

|npm (premium plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/<plugincode>';
----

|`.zip` (community plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
import '<path_to_tinymce_zip>/plugins/<plugincode>';
----

|`.zip` (premium plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
import '<path_to_tinymce_premium_zip>/plugins/<plugincode>';
----

.4+|Common JS
|npm (community plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
require('tinymce/plugins/<plugincode>');
----

|npm (premium plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
require('tinymce-premium/plugins/<plugincode>');
----

|`.zip` (community plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
require('<path_to_tinymce_zip>/plugins/<plugincode>');
----

|`.zip` (premium plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
require('<path_to_tinymce_premium_zip>/plugins/<plugincode>');
----
|===

[[using-premium-plugins]]
== Using premium plugins

After installing the `+tinymce-premium+` package, you need to configure the plugins in your editor. There are two main approaches:

[IMPORTANT]
====
*License Key Manager Requirement:*

> When using premium plugins with a commercial license, you must include the `+licensekeymanager+` plugin. The editor will not function properly without it. For more information, see: xref:license-key.adoc[License Key].

Reviewer 2: Could this be moved to the end of this section? It kinda breaks the flow

Author: As much as this kinda breaks the flow, product requested this to be positioned here for clear visibility.

*xref:bundling-plugins.adoc#bundling-recommended[When bundling]:*
[source,js]
----
import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/licensekeymanager';
----

*xref:bundling-plugins.adoc#using-external-plugins[When using `+external_plugins+`]:*
[source,js]
----
external_plugins: {
  'licensekeymanager': '<path_to_premium_plugins>/licensekeymanager/plugin.min.js'
}
----
====

[[bundling-recommended]]
=== Bundling (Recommended)

For most modern applications, bundling premium plugins is recommended. This includes the plugin code directly in your application bundle.

> . Import the premium plugins you need:

Reviewer 2: We DO need to mention: 
1. Plugins do lazy-load extra resources (additional js, css files) for optimal performance at the run-time. These resources should either be included in the bundle along with the plugin or as static assets in the expected location
2. How to handle language packs per plugin

@kemister85

Author: addressed

+
[source,js]
----
import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/advcode';
import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/tinycomments';
// Always include the licensekeymanager plugin when using premium plugins with a commercial license.
import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/licensekeymanager';
----

. Add the plugins to your editor configuration:
+
[source,js]
----
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',
  license_key: 'T8LK:...', // Your commercial license key
  plugins: 'advcode tinycomments',
  // ... other configuration
});
----

For complete bundling examples, see the <<premium-plugins,Premium plugins>> and <<community-plugins,Community plugins>> sections below.

[[using-external-plugins]]
=== Using external_plugins (Non-bundling)

When bundling is not available or you want to lazy-load plugins, use the `+external_plugins+` option:

[source,js]
----
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',
  license_key: 'T8LK:...', // Your commercial license key
  external_plugins: {
    'advcode': '<path_to_premium_plugins>/advcode/plugin.min.js',
    'tinycomments': '<path_to_premium_plugins>/tinycomments/plugin.min.js',
    // Always include the licensekeymanager plugin when using premium plugins with a commercial license.

>     'licensekeymanager': '<path_to_premium_plugins>/licensekeymanager/plugin.min.js'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    'advcode': '/<path_to_premium_plugins>/advcode/plugin.min.js',
    'tinycomments': '/<path_to_premium_plugins>/tinycomments/plugin.min.js',
    // Always include the licensekeymanager plugin when using premium plugins with a commercial license.
    'licensekeymanager': '/<path_to_premium_plugins>/licensekeymanager/plugin.min.js'
```

Example syntax for including the example "<plugincode>" plugin in a bundle using `content.js`for bundling:

[cols='1,2,3']
|===
|Module Syntax |Source |Example

.4+|ES6+
|npm (community plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
import 'tinymce/plugins/<plugincode>';
----

|npm (premium plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/<plugincode>';
----

|`.zip` (community plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----

> import '../tinymce/plugins/<plugincode>';

Reviewer 3: This looks weird to me in the page. Why do we put the ".." on the zip lines, and not NPM? Unless I'm missing something, nothing says the ZIP must be in the parent folder, and this could be confusing without further explanation because of the implications. 

Could we perhaps do a `<path_to_zip_files>` or something here instead, to make it clearer what this needs to be?

Reviewer 3: Same for the premium plugins line, whatever we do

Author: I agree, I have updated to be either `import '<path_to_tinymce_zip>/plugins/<plugincode>';` ect for these source block examples.

----

|`.zip` (premium plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
import '../tinymce-premium/plugins/<plugincode>';
----

.4+|Common JS
|npm (community plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
require('tinymce/plugins/<plugincode>');
----

|npm (premium plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
require('tinymce-premium/plugins/<plugincode>');
----

|`.zip` (community plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
require('../tinymce/plugins/<plugincode>');
----

|`.zip` (premium plugins)
a|
[source, js]
----
require('../tinymce-premium/plugins/<plugincode>');
----
|===

[NOTE]
====

> When using `+import tinymce from 'tinymce'+`, import only the individual premium plugins from `+tinymce-premium+` (e.g., `+import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/advcode'+`). Do not import the `+tinymce-premium+` package. The plugins automatically register with the {productname} instance.

Reviewer 2: I don't think it is necessary. The bundling tool should throw errors if the package is not meant to import that way

Author: I feel like we should still have this, but a more simplified/ direct message:

>When using `+import tinymce from 'tinymce'+`, import only the individual premium plugins from `+tinymce-premium+` (e.g., `+import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/advcode'+`).

should be suffice.

Reviewer 2: When thinking from a dev perspective, if not importing tinymce (using script to load tinymce), `import 'tinymce-premium` should work, right?

Author: This has been removed.

====

[[using-premium-plugins]]
== Using premium plugins

After installing the `+tinymce-premium+` package, you need to configure the plugins in your editor. There are two main approaches:

=== Bundling (Recommended)

For most modern applications, bundling premium plugins is recommended. This includes the plugin code directly in your application bundle.

. Import the premium plugins you need:
+
[source,js]
----
import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/advcode';
import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/licensekeymanager';
import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/tinycomments';
----

. Add the plugins to your editor configuration:
+
[source,js]
----
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',
  license_key: 'T8LK:...', // Your commercial license key
  plugins: 'advcode tinycomments',
  // ... other configuration
});
----

For complete bundling examples, see the <<Contents>> section below.

=== Using external_plugins (Non-bundling)

When bundling is not available or you want to lazy-load plugins, use the `+external_plugins+` option:

[source,js]
----
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',
  license_key: 'T8LK:...', // Your commercial license key
  external_plugins: {

>     'advcode': '/node_modules/tinymce-premium/plugins/advcode/plugin.min.js',

Reviewer 3: Consider `<path_to_premium_plugins>` or something here too, instead of `/node_modules/`? This example isn't directly linked to installing via NPM - could be ZIP or anything either, and that way it's more generalised.

Author: Updated to `'tinycomments': '<path_to_premium_plugins>/tinycomments/plugin.min.js'` as example.

    'licensekeymanager': '/node_modules/tinymce-premium/plugins/licensekeymanager/plugin.min.js',
    'tinycomments': '/node_modules/tinymce-premium/plugins/tinycomments/plugin.min.js'
  },
  plugins: 'advcode tinycomments',
  // ... other configuration
});
----

[NOTE]
====
The `+external_plugins+` option supports three URL formats:

* Absolute URLs (e.g., `+https://cdn.example.com/...`)
* Relative to web-server root (e.g., `+/node_modules/...`)
* Relative to {productname} `+base_url+` (e.g., `+../../node_modules/...`)

For more information, see: xref:editor-important-options.adoc#external_plugins[`+external_plugins+` configuration option].
====

> === License key manager

Reviewer 3: Should this be further up, first under the "Using premium plugins" heading, since it's a requirement?

Author: I have relocated this to be further up as suggested.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> Always include the `+licensekeymanager+` plugin when using premium plugins with a commercial license. The editor will not function properly without it. For more information, see: xref:license-key.adoc[License Key].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Remember to include the `+licensekeymanager+` plugin when using premium plugins with a commercial license. The editor will not function properly without it. For more information, see: xref:license-key.adoc[License Key].
```

Author: Updated in last commit

====

When bundling:
[source,js]
----
import 'tinymce-premium/plugins/licensekeymanager';
----

When using `+external_plugins+`:
[source,js]
----
external_plugins: {
  'licensekeymanager': '/node_modules/tinymce-premium/plugins/licensekeymanager/plugin.min.js'
}

> ----

Reviewer 2: This could be achieved as a comment in the code.
